D2 Diagrams, Concepts Page, Better Index Page, Assessment Rearrangement (#11001)
PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn: docs/concepts.md

# Concepts

> PrairieLearn is extremely flexible and powerful, but this flexibility can be overwhelming at first. This document provides an overview of the key concepts in PrairieLearn, and how they fit together.

Reviewer: I'm torn on the first sentence here. Acknowledging that folks might feel overwhelmed is empathetic, but I don't know that we benefit from describing our product as "overwhelming". We can probably drop the first sentence without losing anything, but let's discuss this.

Author: can appear complex?

Author: I have some tweaks in the latest version.

## High-level overview

> A [**Course**](./course.md) in PrairieLearn is composed of **Course Instances**, **Questions**, and **Custom Elements**. Each [course instance](./courseInstance.md) is an offering of a course in a particular semester/term. For example, a course "CS 225" might have instances "CS 225 Spring 2022" and "CS 225 Fall 2022". A course instance contains all the **Assessments** for that particular term. The course itself contains the questions and custom elements that are shared across all instances. You can think of the course as a bank of questions and elements, that are then used to create assessments for each instance of the course.

Reviewer: We don't capitalize words like "course" elsewhere. I think just bolding the lowercased words would be sufficient.

> A [**Course**](./course.md) in PrairieLearn is composed of **Course Instances**, **Questions**, and **Custom Elements**. Each [course instance](./courseInstance.md) is an offering of a course in a particular semester/term. For example, a course "CS 225" might have instances "CS 225 Spring 2022" and "CS 225 Fall 2022". A course instance contains all the **Assessments** for that particular term. The course itself contains the questions and custom elements that are shared across all instances. You can think of the course as a bank of questions and elements, that are then used to create assessments for each instance of the course.

Reviewer: I wouldn't consider "custom elements" to be a core enough feature of PL that they deserve to be in the third sentence on our overview page. This is almost always more of a power user feature. I'd mention assessments in that sentence instead, and I'd probably omit mention of custom course elements on this page (or just mention them in passing).

=== "Concept Map"

    ```d2
    --8<-- "docs/diagrams/concept-map.d2"
    ```

=== "Example for the `PrairieLearn 101` course"

    ```d2
    --8<-- "docs/diagrams/concept-map-example.d2"
    ```

### Questions

> [**Questions**](./question.md) are all independent, and can be graded [using Python](./question.md), or using an [external code autograder](./externalGrading.md). They are written in HTML (as a [Mustache template](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html)) and generated / graded using Python.

Reviewer: Workshopping this a bit; feel free to make further tweaks. I was trying to remove the double mention of "gradable with Python" and made additional changes from there.

```suggestion
[**Questions**](./question.md) are all independent, and a given question can be used on many different assessment across many different course instances. They are written in HTML (as a [Mustache template](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html)) and use [elements](./elements.md) to accept student input. They can generate random parameters and grade themselves with Python code. Student code submissions can also be graded with an [external code autograder](./externalGrading.md). 
```

Author: I have some tweaks in the latest version.

> === "Example `question.html`"

Reviewer: IMO it'd be nice to be able to see both the HTML and Python at the same time instead of putting them in adjacent tabs so that one can clearly connect `params.x` to what's happening in Python. What do you think?

    ```html title="question.html"
    <pl-question-panel>
        If $x = {{params.x}}$ and $y$ is {{params.operation}} $x$, what is $y$?
    </pl-question-panel>

    <pl-number-input answers-name="y" label="$y =$"></pl-number-input>
    <pl-submission-panel> {{feedback.y}} </pl-submission-panel>
    ```

=== "Example `server.py`"

    ```python title="server.py"
    def generate(data):
        data["params"]["x"] = random.randint(5, 10)
        data["params"]["operation"] = random.choice(["double", "triple"])

        if data["params"]["operation"] == "double":
            data["correct_answers"]["y"] = 2 * data["params"]["x"]
        else:
            data["correct_answers"]["y"] = 3 * data["params"]["x"]

    def parse(data):
        if "y" not in data["format_errors"] and data["submitted_answers"]["y"] < 0:
            data["format_errors"]["y"] = "Negative numbers are not allowed"

    def grade(data):
        if math.isclose(data["score"], 0.0) and data["submitted_answers"]["y"] > data["params"]["x"]:
            data["partial_scores"]["y"]["score"] = 0.5
            data["score"] = 0.5

>             data["feedback"]["y"] = "Your value for $y$ is larger than $x$, but incorrect."

Reviewer: This isn't really representative of what instructors would usually put in questions; I'd be inclined to remove this and the corresponding `<pl-submission-panel>` from `question.html`.

    ```

=== "Example `info.json`"

    ```json title="info.json"
    {
        "uuid": "cbf5cbf2-6458-4f13-a418-aa4d2b1093ff",
        "title": "Doubling and Tripling",
        "topic": "Basic Arithmetic",
        "tags": ["sp24"],
        "type": "v3",
    }

>     ```

Reviewer: I don't think this is important enough to be part of our core concepts documentation. Can we keep the focus on `question.html` and `server.py`?

### Elements

> Questions are written in HTML and **Elements**. Elements are pre-built interface elements for common questions, like numerical inputs, multiple choice, and more. **Custom Elements** are reusable components that can be tailored to your course and provide a way to create more complex questions. Custom elements are not necessary for most courses.

Reviewer: More workshopping. As I mentioned elsewhere, I don't think that custom elements necessarily need to be mentioned here, especially given the "not necessary for most courses" callout.

```suggestion
Questions can use **elements** to accept student input, display diagrams, control how questions are displayed, and more. **Custom Elements** are reusable components that can be tailored to your course and provide a way to create more complex questions. Custom elements are not necessary for most courses.
```

Author: Looks good!

=== "Integer input element"

    ![](elements/pl-integer-input.png)

=== "HTML for element"

    ```html title="question.html"
    <pl-integer-input answers-name="int_value" label="$y =$"></pl-integer-input>
    ```

> You can view a list of all the available elements in the [Elements documentation](./elements.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can view a list of all the available elements in the [elements documentation](./elements.md).
```

### Assessments

A course contains a collection of questions, which are composed together to create [**Assessments**](./assessment/index.md). Each course instance contains a collection of assessments. There are **Exam Assessments** and **Homework Assessments**.

> Asssessments are organized into **Assessment Sets** based on the type of assessment (e.g. `Homework`, `Quiz`, `Exam`). Optionally, each assessment can be a part of a **Module** (e.g. `Introduction`, `Review`, `Linked Lists`) that represent a segment of a course. Your assessments can then be shown to students grouped by module or by assessment set.

Reviewer: Nit (my hope is that people will know what "module" means).

```suggestion
Asssessments are organized into **Assessment Sets** based on the type of assessment (e.g. `Homework`, `Quiz`, `Exam`). Optionally, each assessment can be a part of a **Module** (e.g. `Introduction`, `Review`, `Linked Lists`). Your assessments can then be shown to students grouped by module or by assessment set.
```

=== "Assessments (Module Grouping)"

>     ![alt text](img/module-grouping.png)

Reviewer: "alt text" is not good alt text. Let's improve this and add alt text where it's missing elsewhere on this page.

=== "Assessments (Set Grouping)"

    ![alt text](img/set-grouping.png)

> ### Metadata

Reviewer: We don't really use this word elsewhere to refer to these files, though I agree that's more or less what they are. Maybe call this section "JSON configuration files".

Each item in PrairieLearn (questions, assessments, etc.) has associated metadata that describes the item. This metadata is stored in JSON files and describes the relationships between items, the item's properties, and other information. The metadata files are used to generate the user interface for editing and viewing the items, as well as the interface for students to complete the items.

| Item            | Metadata file         |
| --------------- | --------------------- |
| Question        | `info.json`           |
| Course          | `infoCourse.json`     |

> | Course Instance | `infoAssessment.json` |

Reviewer: This need to be split into "course instance" and "assessment" and reference the appropriate file for each.

> | Element         | `info.json`           |

Reviewer: I think we can drop this.

        </pl-question-panel>

        <pl-number-input answers-name="y" label="$y =$"></pl-number-input>
        <pl-submission-panel> {{feedback.y}} </pl-submission-panel>
        ```

    === "Example `server.py`"

        ```python title="server.py"
        def generate(data):
            data["params"]["x"] = random.randint(5, 10)
            data["params"]["operation"] = random.choice(["double", "triple"])

            if data["params"]["operation"] == "double":
                data["correct_answers"]["y"] = 2 * data["params"]["x"]
            else:
                data["correct_answers"]["y"] = 3 * data["params"]["x"]

        def parse(data):
            if "y" not in data["format_errors"] and data["submitted_answers"]["y"] < 0:
                data["format_errors"]["y"] = "Negative numbers are not allowed"

        def grade(data):
            if math.isclose(data["score"], 0.0) and data["submitted_answers"]["y"] > data["params"]["x"]:
                data["partial_scores"]["y"]["score"] = 0.5
                data["score"] = 0.5
                data["feedback"]["y"] = "Your value for $y$ is larger than $x$, but incorrect."
        ```

### Elements

> Questions can use **elements** to accept student input, display diagrams, control how questions are displayed. Elements are pre-built interface elements for common questions, like numerical inputs, multiple choice, and more. If you require more flexibility -- **custom elements** are reusable components that can be tailored to your course and provide a way to create more complex questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Questions can use **elements** to accept student input, display diagrams, control how questions are displayed. Elements are pre-built interface elements for common questions, like numerical inputs, multiple choice, and more. If you require more flexibility, you can build **custom elements** that can be tailored to your course and provide a way to create more complex questions.
```

Maybe link the phrase "custom elements" to the part of the docs that discusses them?

=== "Integer input element"

>     ![](elements/pl-integer-input.png)

Reviewer: Needs alt text.

=== "HTML for element"

    ```html title="question.html"
    <pl-integer-input answers-name="int_value" label="$y =$"></pl-integer-input>
    ```

You can view a list of all the available elements in the [elements documentation](./elements.md).

### Assessments

> A course contains a collection of questions, which are composed together to create [**assessments**](./assessment/index.md). Each course instance contains a collection of assessments. There are **exam assessments** and **homework assessments**.

Reviewer: Do we need to discuss types here? This is actually somewhat confusing for beginners, and we have plans to eliminate the distinction.

```suggestion
A course contains a collection of questions, which are composed together to create [**assessments**](./assessment/index.md).
```

Author: > If we can give a quick summary ("homeworks give unlimited retries with different variants for mastery learning, exams give limited tries for summative assessments"), I'm open to this.

Author: > A course contains a collection of questions, which are composed together to create [**assessments**](./assessment/index.md). Each course instance contains a collection of assessments. There are **exam assessments** and **homework assessments**. Homeworks are formative assessments designed for mastery learning: they give unlimited retries with different variants, and incentivize repeated correct answers. Exams are summative assessments designed for measure learning: they give limited attempts with the same variant, and incentivize getting the correct answer on the first try.

Author: ^ the above text was added.

# Concepts

PrairieLearn is extremely flexible and powerful, but this flexibility can appear opaque at first. This document provides an overview of the key concepts in PrairieLearn, and how they fit together.

## High-level overview

A [**course**](./course.md) in PrairieLearn is composed of **course instances** and **questions**. Each [course instance](./courseInstance.md) is an offering of a course in a particular semester/term. For example, a course "CS 225" might have instances "CS 225 Spring 2022" and "CS 225 Fall 2022". A course instance contains all the **assessments** for that particular term. The course itself contains the questions that are shared across all instances. You can think of the course as containing a bank of questions that are then used to create assessments for each instance of the course, and a way to organize every instance of the course.

=== "Concept Map"

    ```d2

>     --8<-- "docs/diagrams/concept-map.d2"

Reviewer 2: Honestly I'd be fine with making a directory per docs page by default. This would make all pages the same and allow us to move all images Into the per-page directories.

>     --8<-- "docs/diagrams/concept-map.d2"

Author: I'm a little hesitant right now, as it makes hyperlinking a little harder. Not sure I see a major payoff until pages have more images. We only have 5 images across all non-concept pages currently.

>     --8<-- "docs/diagrams/concept-map.d2"

Reviewer 2: I'm fine only doing it when we have images.

>     --8<-- "docs/diagrams/concept-map.d2"

Author: Done.

    ```

> === "Example for the `PrairieLearn 101` course"

Author: Did a slightly different layout, hopefully a little more obvious now. Still hidden as the image is quite large.

> === "Example for the `PrairieLearn 101` course"

Reviewer 2: That's now very clear!

However, I'm wondering whether we'd be better off scrapping both of the existing diagrams and instead having just one diagram which is like the current example, but with one two questions?

My thinking is that most users understand concrete examples better than abstract ideas. In the concrete example, perhaps we could use labels like "Course Instance: Fall 2024" or "Fall 2024 (course instance)" and similarly for the other objects. At the moment, a user needs to map between the abstract and concrete diagrams to figure out that green boxes are assessments, for example. I think this might be clearer with just one diagram that labeled the green boxes with "HW 1 (assessment)" or similar. I also think that we don't need so many questions in the example. Maybe just two questions, one with a single MC element, the second with numeric and custom diagram elements? And then Exam 1 could include both questions, and HW 1 could just include the second question? I feel like that makes the cardinality of the relationships clear?

I'm also wondering whether we can skip the assessment set layer for this diagram? I personally tend to think of assessments as living directly within course instances, not nested inside assessment sets. Assessment sets themselves are more like an additional "type" property, similar to "module". Also assessment sets are actually children of the course, not course instance, strictly speaking. Just as we don't include modules on this diagram, I think we could avoid assessment sets as well, and then later we have the explanation of both assessment sets and modules together in the text.

> === "Example for the `PrairieLearn 101` course"

Author: Maybe we can discuss this on Slack, I am open to changing it.

    ```d2
    --8<-- "docs/diagrams/concept-map-example.d2"
    ```

### Questions

> [**Questions**](./question.md) are all independent, and a given question can be used on many different assessments across many different course instances. They are written in HTML (as a [Mustache template](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html)) and use [elements](./elements.md) to accept student input. Python code can be used to generate random parameters and grade questions. Every time a question is shown to a student with randomly generated parameters, that is called a **variant** of the question.

Author: I swapped it to a lighter blue.

> [**Questions**](./question.md) are all independent, and a given question can be used on many different assessments across many different course instances. They are written in HTML (as a [Mustache template](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html)) and use [elements](./elements.md) to accept student input. Python code can be used to generate random parameters and grade questions. Every time a question is shown to a student with randomly generated parameters, that is called a **variant** of the question.

Reviewer 2: I think I can detect a slight improvement 😅. But if I'm measuring correctly, regular text is #212121 and links are #1c4193, which is a contrast ratio of 1.7:1. For WCAG AA we need 3:1 for links, I think.

Also, at the moment the links become even less distinguished from the text when hovering over them, to the point where I really have to look hard to spot that they aren't regular text.

> [**Questions**](./question.md) are all independent, and a given question can be used on many different assessments across many different course instances. They are written in HTML (as a [Mustache template](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html)) and use [elements](./elements.md) to accept student input. Python code can be used to generate random parameters and grade questions. Every time a question is shown to a student with randomly generated parameters, that is called a **variant** of the question.

Author: I made the color a light blue.

> [**Questions**](./question.md) are all independent, and a given question can be used on many different assessments across many different course instances. They are written in HTML (as a [Mustache template](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html)) and use [elements](./elements.md) to accept student input. Python code can be used to generate random parameters and grade questions. Every time a question is shown to a student with randomly generated parameters, that is called a **variant** of the question.

Reviewer 2: I can see them now!

But I'm afraid that the links themselves (#59b2f0) are now only 2.32:1 against the white background, which again fails WCAG AA. This is surprisingly tricky! (part of why we stick to default Bootstrap, where they've sorted all this out)

Something like #127AC4 should work (4.55:1 against white, but also 3.53:1 against the regular #212121 text).

> [**Questions**](./question.md) are all independent, and a given question can be used on many different assessments across many different course instances. They are written in HTML (as a [Mustache template](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html)) and use [elements](./elements.md) to accept student input. Python code can be used to generate random parameters and grade questions. Every time a question is shown to a student with randomly generated parameters, that is called a **variant** of the question.

Author: Switched to those blues.
